# **Spark Data Lake on AWS**

### **Introduction**
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.


### **Project Description**
Main task in this project is to building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

Build an ETL pipeline and data lake using spark hosted on S3. Steps to complete the project, load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. Deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.

### **Project Datasets**

> **Song Dataset**

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. 


>> {'artist_id': {0: 'AR8IEZO1187B99055E'},
 'artist_latitude': {0: nan},
 'artist_location': {0: ''},
 'artist_longitude': {0: nan},
 'artist_name': {0: 'Marc Shaiman'},
 'duration': {0: 149.86404},
 'num_songs': {0: 1},
 'song_id': {0: 'SOINLJW12A8C13314C'},
 'title': {0: 'City Slickers'},
 'year': {0: 2008}}


> **Log Dataset**

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations, partitioned by year and month...

>> {'artist': {0: 'Sydney Youngblood', 1: 'Gang Starr'},
 'auth': {0: 'Logged In', 1: 'Logged In'},
 'firstName': {0: 'Jacob', 1: 'Layla'},
 'gender': {0: 'M', 1: 'F'},
 'itemInSession': {0: 53, 1: 88},
 'lastName': {0: 'Klein', 1: 'Griffin'},
 'length': {0: 238.07955, 1: 151.92771},
 'level': {0: 'paid', 1: 'paid'},
 'location': {0: 'Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL',
  1: 'Lake Havasu City-Kingman, AZ'},
 'method': {0: 'PUT', 1: 'PUT'},
 'page': {0: 'NextSong', 1: 'NextSong'},
 'registration': {0: 1540558108796.0, 1: 1541057188796.0},
 'sessionId': {0: 954, 1: 984},
 'song': {0: "Ain't No Sunshine", 1: 'My Advice 2 You (Explicit)'},
 'status': {0: 200, 1: 200},
 'ts': {0: 1543449657796, 1: 1543449690796},
 'userAgent': {0: '"Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit/537.78.2 (KHTML, like Gecko) Version/7.0.6 Safari/537.78.2"',
  1: '"Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1; WOW64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/36.0.1985.125 Safari/537.36"'},
 'userId': {0: '73', 1: '24'}}

### **Schema for Song Play Analysis**

#### **Fact Table**

> **songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
>> - songplay_id
>> - start_time
>> - user_id
>> - level
>> - song_id
>> - artist_id
>> - session_id
>> - location
>> - user_agent


#### **Dimension Tables**

> **users - users in the app**
>> - user_id
>> - first_name
>> - last_name
>> - gender
>> - level

> **songs** - songs in music database
>> - song_id
>> - title
>> - artist_id
>> - year
>> - duration

> **artists** - artists in music database
>> - artist_id
>> - name
>> - location
>> - latitude
>> - longitude

> **time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
>> - start_time
>> - hour
>> - day
>> - week
>> - month
>> - year
>> - weekday


### **Project Template**

> Project workspace includes three files:
>> **etl.py** - reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3

>> **dl.cfg** - contains your AWS credentials

>> **README.md** - provides project description.
